# Proposal: npm-only origami components

## motivation

There is so much motivation:

- Teams across the FT are moving away from `bower`, and the Origami Team are meant to serve those teams.

- The `origami-component-converter` project that builds npm versions of our bower components is really confusing for users, and is horrible to maintain!

- There are new ideas we have to make Origami easier to use that will be much easier to do when using npm and not needing to support bower anymore, because the tools for doing them do not exist on, or support, bower.

- Dependencies we want to use that exist only on npm, we just don't use at the moment.

- We currently maintain our own bundler because there aren't other modern bundlers that support both npm and bower. A bundler is a complex piece of work, which means less time spent on work that more directly helps people.

- The javascript ecosystem has moved on, and we haven't. We may not be able to use some opensource projects within components, without complication. Meaning we need to build more aspects of a component from scratch. The same is true for tooling, e.g. the bundler mentioned previously.

- The npm client is now ready to support us. npmv7's automatic install of `peerDependencies` will allow us to maintain a flat origami tree in apps.

- It makes it easier to setup a new project with Origami, since npm is already used by projects, engineers are more familiar with npm, and npm is better supported by the JavaScript ecosystem (as mentioned) without special setup requirements.

- Onboarding is also easier since npm is already used by projects anyway and engineers are more familiar with npm

- Our documentation assumes bower but some people are already using npm, which can lead to confusion and wasted time. By becoming npm only Origami documentation becomes more simple.

## explanation

We stop supporting bower!

We delete `bower.json` from our components and we convert them to npm components, moving the dependencies into the `package.json`.

We'll be bumping the `origamiVersion` from `1` to `"2.0.0"`, so our services and tools know to process the component as an npm component.

## work required

- Specification
	- Create Draft Specification -- https://github.com/Financial-Times/origami-website/pull/273
		- Require npm 7+
		- Replace Bower references with npm
		- Require `peerDependencies` are used, never `dependencies`, to ensure flatness
		- All packages which export client-side JavaScript **must** set the [browser](https://docs.npmjs.com/files/package.json#browser) field in `package.json` to have the name of the entry point file.
		- @todo any other `package.json` restrictions to add or remove?
		- Add that demos are not part of the Origami API explicitly, to support future work
		- Rewrite sass imports of origami components to use the full npm package. E.G. `@financial-times/o-colors` instead of `o-colors`. This will enable a simpler sass configuration for our users.
		- Add `_index.scss` files to make it possible to import Origami component sass without needing to name a specific file. E.G. let's make `@import('@financial-times/o-colors')` work.
		- Require components' sass is able to be compiled with the primary implementation of sass. Right now that is [Dart Sass](https://sass-lang.com/dart-sass)
- Communications
	- Create a communications plan:
	- Ensure users are involved in the proposal; and
	- Ensure users are prepared to switch to npm and dart within x months, we'll need to maintain multiple versions of components in the meantime; and
	- Communicate the value across the business
- Origami CI Tools
	- Update `origami-ci-tools` so it may publish v2 components, e.g. [without using occ](https://github.com/Financial-Times/origami-ci-tools/blob/9083d70dbba7da78a4ffcb8bc84211720e844cca/commands/release.js#L42)
- Test Component
	- Create v2 test components to support tool and service work
	- Publish a `o-test-component` version with Sass and JavaScript, which conforms to spec v2, and depends on a new `o-test-component-dependency` v2 component
- Build Tools
	- Support v1 and v2 components conditionally by checking `origamiVersion`:
	- Build v2 [demos without relying on bower.json](https://github.com/Financial-Times/origami-build-tools/blob/ec4ae8354a05f0495e38a30117e126b3674fbb9e/lib/tasks/demo-build.js#L28)
	- Add tests to cover Origami Build Tools features with v1 and v2 components
- Build Service
	- Install the component, e.g:
		- Attempt an npm install, fall back to bower on error; or
		- Make a request to Repo Data and install via npm if v2; or
		- Install via npm by default. Maintain a list of all v1 component major versions to install via bower
	- Build the component:
		- Check the Origami version in origami.json
		- Conditionally build the component based on the src for v1 or npm bundle for v2
		- @todo what does the above involve?
- Repo Data
	- Add `origamiVersion` to the repository/version entities
	- Include `peerDependencies` in the [repository/version dependencies](https://github.com/Financial-Times/origami-repo-data/blob/b6c3d64525680f5134f6081be7450e88ffdf555e/models/version.js#L143)
	- Add `isPeer` to the [Dependencies entity](https://origami-repo-data.ft.com/v1/docs/api/repositories#entity-dependency)
	- It may be that no other changes are required since repo data already supports non-component projects. Add tests to confirm.
	- E.g. that for a v2 component `package` is added to the `manifests` key, bower is null as with non-component projects
	- E.g. npm dependencies, including peer dependencies, are returned in repository/version entities
	- E.g. v1 behaviour doesn't change
	- Add an `origamiVersion` filter to the [repos endpoint](https://origami-repo-data.ft.com/v1/docs/api/repositories#get-v1-repos)
- Registry UI
	- Test the registry displays `o-test-component`, `o-test-component-dependency` correctly. This may not be the case if, for example, the Registry assumes the [repo data registry/version entity](https://origami-repo-data.ft.com/v1/docs/api/repositories#entity-repo) has a bower manifest. It doesn't appear to make such an assumption. The registry may just work since it also deals with non-components. E.g. it will [already display npm dependencies](https://github.com/Financial-Times/origami-registry-ui/blob/42fac8202a5c9f7f960ec4091bbedd78903cc9c4/lib/routes/components.js#L283) provided Repo Data is updated.
	- Add an `origamiVersion` filter to the right hand sidebar with options all, v1, v2. Default to all so not to hide components.
	- Display a v2 badge on the component listing and in the right hand sidebar on the component page.
	- Update registry documentation. For example component pages include bower related install instructions in the right hand sidebar. These should remain the same for v1 components but show npm instructions for v2 components. The registry should be able to do this with data from repo data.
- Origami Workshop
	- Confirm the [origami workshop](https://github.com/Financial-Times/origami-workshop) CLI works with `origamiVersion` v2 components
- Create Origami Component
	- Update [create-origami-component](https://github.com/Financial-Times/create-origami-component) to create a v2 component
- Origami Website
	- Version the specification, so the v1 specification is still available
	- Publish the v2 specification
	- Add a `origamiVersion` migration guide
	- Update all documentation and tutorials to reflect v2. With references to v1, i.e. as asides or links to a document explaining the difference, where needed whilst users migrate
- Bower Registry
	- Deprecate the Bower registry.
- Components
	- Update all Origami team maintained components to support `origamiVersion` v2, including `README` updates e.g. to remove any existing bower/npm reference and use the correct `import` path
	- Work with other teams to update components they maintain. It may be they are less willing to maintain two versions and will release a major at the same time as upgrading end projects
- Other Origami Projects
	- Any project which an `origami.json` which isn't affected should release a `minor` which updates the `origamiVersion` to `v2`. This is so it appears up-to-date and is returned when filtering for `v2`, i.e. in the Registry or via Repo Data.

## alternatives

### do nothing

We can continue being an old-fashioned drag and suffer the consequences. Such as increased maintenance, onboarding, and project integration costs outlined above.

## supporting examples

I don't know... every other modern component system I guess.

## notes

### migration steps for products coming from bower

- Firstly: update to the latest version of the Origami Components which is available via Bower.
- Install npm 7 `npm i -g 'npm@^7'`
- Move dependencies from `bower.json` to `package.json` as `peerDependencies`
- Delete `bower.json`
- Rewrite all `import`s and `require`s of Origami packages to use the full npm package name.
E.G:
```diff
-import oTracking from 'o-tracking';
+import oTracking from '@financial-times/o-tracking';
```
- Remove `bower_components` from the sass include-paths and add `node_modules`
- Rewrite all sass `@include`s of Origami packages to use the full npm package name.
```diff
-@import 'o-buttons';
+@import '@financial-times/o-buttons';
```

### migration steps for products already on npm

- Install npm 7 `npm i -g 'npm@^7'`
- Move Origami dependencies to `package.json`'s `peerDependencies`
_optional steps_
- Remove `node_modules/@financial-times` from the sass include-paths and add `node_modules`
- Rewrite all sass `@include`s of Origami packages to use the full npm package name.
```diff
-@import 'o-buttons';
+@import '@financial-times/o-buttons';
```
